Manoush Zomorodi: OK, so I have
been following Jasmine's career.
She gave a TED Talk at TEDWomen
five years ago --
Jasmine Crowe-Houston:
Five years ago in December.
MZ: Which is crazy.
And I interviewed you three years ago,
and now here you are.
And so much has happened.
JCH: Yes.
MZ: You are more of
a behind-the-scenes person.
For people who don't know Goodr,
explain your story, how you came
to be so aware of food waste
and what you are doing about it.
JCH: Hi, everyone.
I'm so excited to be back at TED.
This is like, we have a relationship here.
I mean, TEDx, TEDWomen,
TED Radio, TEDNext.
I mean, I'm going to name my next kid Ted.
(Laughter)
But, you know, I started
Goodr here in Atlanta.
I had created a homeless --
I would say, for people experiencing
homelessness, a pop-up restaurant.
And the concept really came to me
after feeding and working
with a volunteer group
and making all these
peanut butter and jelly sandwiches,
going out to the streets
and handing them out,
and a man telling me,
"Oh, I'm allergic to nuts."
And I thought, we just made 1,000
peanut butter and jelly sandwiches,
and nuts are one
of the number one allergies.
And it made me think that dignity was lost
in how we are serving our unhoused,
in how we're serving people in need.
And that too often we think,
well, they're homeless or they're hungry,
take this and be happy,
forgetting the fact that they
could have religious convictions,
dietary restrictions,
or they could plain out be allergic.
And so I created this pop-up restaurant
where I would rent tables and chairs
and linens and print out menus
and let people feel like
they were dining at a restaurant.
And a video went viral,
and it was a 15-second clip.
I'll never forget it, because it was
before Instagram allowed you to have,
you know, minute-videos, longer videos.
So I woke up one morning
really afraid because I had never,
I mean obviously gone viral.
And I was like,
what's going on on Facebook?
I need to get off this app.
It was like one of those things.
And so I'm reading through millions
of views and comments,
and what people kept asking me
was: Who donated the food?
And the truth was, nobody,
I was couponing, price-matching.
I would start cooking on Friday, Saturday,
go out and feed about 300-500
people every Sunday.
And so I was like, I need
to get this food donated.
I went to Google, fully expecting
to get a list of all the businesses
that are going to donate food to me
to help me keep feeding people.
And I would, you know,
live happily ever after.
And instead I found about food waste.
And I read an 86-page report
by the Harvard Food Law Policy Group.
And as I'm reading through this,
at this point now into
the wee hours of the morning,
I'm getting upset because I'm thinking
about the people
that are lined up at 9am
for my 3pm feeding every Sunday,
because they know
that there's not a lot of people
that come out to feed during the week.
They were living at the former
Metro Atlanta Peach Tree
Homeless Task Force.
It was the only shelter in the city
that would allow families to come.
And that's so important.
A lot of you all don't know,
but if you are a homeless mother,
you have a 15-year-old son,
you guys have got to go
to two different shelters.
And so I was feeding all these people.
I learned about food waste,
and I became upset.
And I was like, I'm going to solve this.
I'm going to do something,
to your point, better and “Goodr.”
And that's what got me started.
MZ: So explain what Goodr does now,
because from going
to peanut butter sandwiches,
it's impressive.
JCH: So now we have
a two-sided business model
as it relates to food waste.
We can help a business keep all
of their food out of landfill.
If it's edible, we're getting it
to people in need
that are people like me feeding people:
shelters, safe houses,
domestic violence centers, churches.
One of our largest partners
is communities and schools.
We feed thousands of kids every week.
So we keep edible food
from going to landfill,
and we are delivering it
directly to people in need
while giving all of our clients
back a lot of data:
how many pounds they're keeping
out of the landfill,
what does this mean for their CO2
emissions and their carbon footprint.
And then we have a hunger side
of our business,
which was birthed during the pandemic,
that really focuses on creating
sustainable solutions to solve hunger.
We build free grocery stores
inside of schools.
We have 28 right now around the country.
We have grocery and meal delivery.
During the height of the pandemic,
Goodr delivered all the meals
to Atlanta Public School students
that got free breakfast and lunch
but were learning virtually.
So we made sure
that they got food at home.
So we really are solving
hunger and food waste.
MZ: So can you just explain --
Can we give her --
(Applause)
Part of me is like, 40 percent,
that's such a crazy statistic.
JCH: It's a crazy number.
MZ: Why, when you talk to the companies,
nonprofits, like, what is happening
that there is so much food available,
but going nowhere?
JCH: It's a startling number.
If food waste itself was a country,
it would be the third-largest
country in the world.
So it's a lot of food.
So you think about that.
Between the production,
the transportation and the disposal
nearly two percent of all US GDP
we spend on food that,
you know, we never even eat.
And I think what it is is that
the old guard is, we've always
done it this way.
We've always thrown it away,
and this is how we do it.
And of course, when I was first starting,
people were like, oh, well,
if someone gets sick and we'll get sued.
And so Goodr said, hey,
we'll take on all of that onus.
We provide the packaging materials,
we provide the labels.
When nonprofits receive the food,
it comes from Goodr,
they sign hold harmless agreements.
I have a multi-million-dollar
liability insurance
because the airport was my first customer,
and we were driving on tarmacs,
and I ended up having to get insurance
that I wasn't quite ready for.
But it definitely helped the business.
And even with all of that,
people will still say,
"Well, we're just afraid."
Or, “Our lawyers just
can’t wrap their heads around it.”
Or you know, “We’re going to compost
everything, even if it’s edible.”
Which I’m still happier
that it’s not going into landfill
if it gets composted.
You know, of course, Goodr,
we deliver to hog farms,
we have anaerobic digesters
we'll take food to.
So we want to keep it out of landfill.
But feeding hungry people
is not a priority
for too many people in this country.
And that's a problem.
(Applause)
MZ: Tomorrow, I am coming
to see one of your facilities.
JCH: I'm so excited about that,
you're going to love it.
MZ: From what I understand,
it's bread day,
so bread is going to be coming
in from all different places,
and then you are going to be sorting it.
Some of it goes, as you said, to compost,
if it's not for human consumption.
JCH: Or to a hog farm.
MZ: Or to a hog farm, which is amazing.
JCH: Or a cattle farm, I think
we have cattle farms now.
MZ: Yes you do, I've seen that.
And then some will go,
of course, to people, to schools,
to hospitals or wherever else.
But talk to me more
from the corporate side.
How did you get people
to come on board with this?
Did something have to change
when it comes to laws
and forcing companies to do this?
Is it because they want to be able
to say to their customers
like, we are a sustainable company.
JCH: So what I used to do
is I would go to the websites
of the big hotel groups,
the big food groups,
and I would look
at their sustainability reports.
This is how I got the airport
as a customer.
And I went to them and I said,
“Hey, I’m looking at your waste tonnage,
and 27 percent of this,
according to the EPA, is food.
So you guys wasted 25 million meals."
Now I have no idea if that was true,
but I looked at their
sustainability report.
I used the EPA's calculation
that food was the number one
thing in landfill,
and I was able to go back
to the Atlanta airport
and say, "Listen, you guys
are sitting in College Park,
the children in this city
are living in poverty,
and all this food is going to waste.
And this doesn't make any sense."
And so the airport became one
of our first large-scale customers.
And you think of all
of the grab-and-go food items
that goes to waste every single night
if it's not for Goodr.
And now that's why I need
to be in more airports.
But getting that before it goes to waste
and getting it to Gateway Center
before Georgia workforce,
their third shift is coming out
and building half of this city.
A lot of men that are trying
to transition out of homelessness,
them getting that meal,
putting this food in our grocery stores
and families taking it home for free.
This is what it does.
So I think it was really about making
people keep their promises.
You know, like, hey,
I won't say the hotel group,
but they had on their website
and this is someone
I'm trying to pitch now,
and I was like, you guys said you're going
to cut food waste in half by 2025.
This is in two months.
Why have you guys not started?
What’s the process?
So a lot of times it's trying
to hold their foot to the fire.
MZ: Can we clone Jasmine?
I want her holding all these
companies accountable.
(Applause)
JCH: It’s about keeping --
I think we live for the announcement
and we as people don't follow up.
On the delivery, right?
Because for someone
to invest millions, I mean,
I don't even know how much
a Super Bowl commercial costs,
but I've heard it's like
a million dollars per 30 seconds.
I could be wrong.
But to invest two to three million dollars
and not follow up on your promise?
MZ: That's called greenwashing.
JCH: Yes, and that's a lot of that.
MZ: So you're not just
in Atlanta, though now.
You've grown a lot.
JCH: Yes, so we are
in 15 states, 26 markets.
So this is where we have food
moving and being donated.
And then we have grocery stores
in about five states,
maybe six or seven now.
But we are doing our food waste
business obviously in more locations.
MZ: Someone was asking me,
they're like, but how do
these companies keep track?
Because it must be so random
what they can get rid of.
And I said, well, actually,
there's an app for that.
Which, when I first heard about your app,
I was like, that seems weird,
but actually it is really the linchpin
in making this new system work.
JCH: It's a logistics issue,
that's really what I saw.
So when and shout out to Jackie Chu,
she runs TEDxAtlanta,
and she convinced me
to do my first TEDx Talk.
And when I was talking to her
about it, she was like,
"Oh, I get it, it's a logistics problem."
And I was like, you get it.
And that's really what it is.
Hunger is not an issue of scarcity.
And we hear about that, right?
We need to produce more food,
we need to grow more food
We are wasting 40 percent of it.
It's really about logistics.
How do we connect this excess food
with the millions of people that need it?
Seniors, their income doesn't change.
We're going to be seniors, all of us.
Some of us probably already are.
But all of us, God willing.
And once you get to that point,
it doesn't matter then
if toilet paper goes up,
if bread or eggs are more expensive.
This is all you have to work with.
So it's really about how
quickly can we match it.
So we inventory everything
it is that they sell.
We create a very easy user experience
where they click on the items,
tell us how many, request the pick-up.
We leverage the shared economy
that's already out there,
and that's how we've been able
to grow to a lot of different locations.
We don't have to hire our own drivers
or purchase trucks and vehicles.
Now we do have a couple,
but what we leverage is a driver
that's already out there.
And drivers love it.
They're like, "Oh my God,
I'm feeding people,
I'm getting paid to do it."
And they make it happen.
MZ: So, literally, like, the person,
let's say I'm working
at a big company and I work,
you know, in the cafeteria area,
I take out my phone, and what do I do?
JCH: Or it could go on
your point of sale system
and you click on the Goodr app,
your menu is already there,
and you're just clicking
on the items that you have,
saying, I’ve got 10 chicken
breasts, I’ve got this.
Our platform is calculating
the approximate weight of those items.
So we pull a lot of that data
from US Foods, Sysco,
whoever they're ordering their food from,
and then it's calculating
the tax value of those items
at the time of donation,
which is a critical offering
to our clients.
And once that food gets picked up,
a nonprofit receives it.
They sign for it like
they would a UPS package,
and a donation letter
with a picture of that donation
from that nonprofit
automatically goes to our client's portal.
So now they see everything
that they've donated,
the nonprofit it went to,
and a tax deduction receipt
for what they donated.
(Applause)
MZ: And the carbon that they've saved?
JCH: Yeah, we have a corporate social
responsibility impact report
as well as a sustainability.
And actually, I remember
one of my angel investors,
she sits on the board of IHG,
who’s one of Goodr’s customers,
and she messaged me last year
at their board meeting in London.
And she was like,
"Goodr is on the board report."
They’re literally talking
about how we’re cutting food waste
with this company.
MZ: So they're starting
to show off by using you.
JCH: As they should.
(Laughter)
It's such a good thing, yeah.
MZ: Growth.
I mean, we should be clear,
you're not a nonprofit.
You are a B Corp.
Why is that important to you?
Why did you decide to go
for a for-profit company?
Is it because that is something
that you hope to scale?
Where are the pros and cons with that?
JCH: There was a couple things.
One, I think the nonprofit was going to be
a much harder old guard to get past
because everybody always donates
to the food bank.
It's all we ever know, we've been doing
canned food drives since we were eight.
Our kids are still doing it in school now,
and I felt like I was going to be
spending a lot of time
trying to gain respect
in the nonprofit space.
The biggest piece that I saw, though,
was that businesses were already
paying to throw this food away.
So this was not newfound spin.
They're already paying
Waste Management, Republic Services,
whoever their waste company is.
Mind you, the waste industry
is a trillion-dollar industry.
None of us ever say,
let's just keep our trash.
We were like, is trash day missing?
Oh my God, it's a hurricane,
they didn't run today.
We are paying for this on a daily basis.
So when I realized that,
I realized that this was not going to be
newfound spin for these businesses.
It was going to be a better spin.
So dollar for dollar,
we're a little bit more expensive.
But the outcome, the return
on the investment for our clients
is far much greater
than they would ever get
from a traditional waste company.
And so I do look at us
as a triple bottom line,
we're for people, we're for planet
and we are for profit.
(Applause and cheers)